Add changelog for 4.1.0 release (#4470)
colmap/colmap: CHANGELOG.rst

Changelog
=========

-------------------------
COLMAP 4.1.0 (25/06/2026)
-------------------------

New Features
------------

> * Added Caspar, a GPU-accelerated bundle adjustment backend, selectable as an

Reviewer: Does it make sense to link to their paper https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.30583 or github project for this collab?

Reviewer: Does it make sense to say something about the nominal expected behavior?

Reviewer 2: It seems that there is not too much documentation on Caspar in the repo. Maybe it should be documented directly in the repo, not just in the change log.

Author: I'll expand on Caspar docs in a separate PR.

  alternative to the Ceres solver. Includes rig support, GPU device selection,
  and pycolmap bindings for choosing the bundle adjustment and mapper backends.
* Added EUCM (Enhanced Unified Camera Model) camera model.

> * Added spherical (equirectangular) camera model. The ``panorama_sfm`` example

Reviewer: Does it make sense to say in more details about the two different modes. I assume the current description would be confusing for end users with 360 cameras, many of whom are not fully familiar with the context.

  can now convert perspective cameras back to equirectangular and supports

>   incremental and global mapping.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Added the EUCM (Enhanced Unified Camera Model) camera model.
* Added the spherical (equirectangular) camera models. This enables native reconstruction of 360 images and is generally faster but less accurate than rendering perspective views, as performed in the ``panorama_sfm`` example.
* Improved the ``panorama_sfm`` example, which now converts perspective cameras back to equirectangular and supports global mapping.
```

* Added advancing-front surface reconstruction meshing.

> * Added gravity-only pose priors.

Reviewer: I would be careful here. I don't think our SfM pipeline fully supports gravity only pose priors.

Author: Reformulated.

* Added ``CamRayFromImg`` bearing-vector unprojection interface and bindings.
* Estimate separate ``fx``/``fy`` in the p4pf solver for two-focal camera models.
* Added a new ``version`` CLI command to print the COLMAP version.
* Added ``MVS_ENABLED`` build option to compile without the MVS module.
* Added ``GlobalMapper.keep_max_num_tracks`` option to bound established tracks.
* Added rotation averaging options to the GlobalMapper configuration.
* Added pycolmap bindings for ``ReprojectionErrorType`` and
  additional point filter methods.
* Added support for showing camera up vector in the viewer.
* Replaced the GUI icons with Material Symbols (Apache 2.0).
* Added keyboard shortcuts for model import/export in the GUI.

Improvements
------------
* Accelerated the exhaustive matcher by using ``IndexIVFScalarQuantizer``
  instead of ``IndexIVFFlat``.
* Parallelized color extraction across all images.
* Added and updated sensor specs to the camera database.
* Avoided a forced copy in ``mvs::Image::SetBitmap``.
* Faster incremental triangulator through reused BFS allocations and

>   simplified ``merge_trials_`` in the

Reviewer 2: incomplete sentence.

  ``NormalizePath``.
* Fix crash in ``AdjustGlobalBundle`` after aggressive frame filtering.
* Fix stale ``reg_stats``/observation stats and add underflow guards in mapper
  bookkeeping, and clear ``num_reg_images``.
* Fix empty PatchMatch results on Blackwell GPUs (sm_100+).
* Fix locale-dependent float parsing/formatting.
* Fix thread oversubscription in the hierarchical mapper.
* Fix mask usage log never printing in the feature writer thread.
* Fix ``pyceres`` ``.problem`` attribute on ``CeresBundleAdjuster`` factory
  functions.
* Fix conditional Eigen alignment for the 3.4.0 pre-release version.
* Fix optional access in guided matching.
* Fix reading of dynamic matrices in the SQLite database.
* Fix using the ALIKED feature extractor with pycolmap and ALIKED ``min_score``
  keypoint filtering.
* Fix various pycolmap and PoissonRecon installation/build issues.
* Fix missing mesh simplification reset and duplicate sources.
* Add destructor to ``ModelViewerWidget`` to call ``makeCurrent()``.
* Fix checks in the ``GpuMat`` constructor.
* Add missing LightGlue matcher type to the GUI.
* Log an error instead of crashing on unknown EXIF orientation.

> 

Reviewer 2: Clip extreme pixels in fisheye undistortion #4386 can be added.

Reviewer 3: Already added above `* Clipping extreme pixels in fisheye undistortion.`

-------------------------

New Features
------------
* Added Caspar, a GPU-accelerated bundle adjustment backend, selectable as an
  alternative to the default Ceres solver. Includes rig support, GPU device
  selection, and pycolmap bindings for choosing the bundle adjustment and mapper
  backends. Caspar is often 1-2 orders of magnitude faster than the Ceres CUDA
  backend for medium- to large-scale problems, leading to drastic speedups
  especially for the incremental mapper.
* Added EUCM (Enhanced Unified Camera Model) camera model.
* Added spherical (equirectangular) camera model. The ``panorama_sfm`` example
  now converts perspective cameras back to equirectangular and supports
  switching between incremental and global mapping.
* Added advancing-front surface reconstruction meshing.
* Added support for extracting gravity pose priors from EXIF orientation tags.
* Added ``CamRayFromImg`` bearing-vector unprojection interface and bindings.
* Estimate separate ``fx``/``fy`` in the p4pf solver for two-focal camera models.
* Added a new ``version`` CLI command to print the COLMAP version.
* Added ``MVS_ENABLED`` build option to compile without the MVS module.

> * Added ``GlobalMapper.keep_max_num_tracks`` option to bound established tracks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Added ``GlobalMapper.keep_max_num_tracks`` option to bound the number of established tracks.
```

* Added rotation averaging options to the GlobalMapper configuration.
* Added pycolmap bindings for ``ReprojectionErrorType`` and
  additional point filter methods.
* Added support for showing camera up vector in the viewer.
* Replaced the GUI icons with Material Symbols (Apache 2.0).
* Added keyboard shortcuts for model import/export in the GUI.

Improvements
------------
* Accelerated the exhaustive matcher by using ``IndexIVFScalarQuantizer``
  instead of ``IndexIVFFlat``.

> * Faster color extraction through parallelization across all images.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Accelerated the extraction of colors through parallelization across all images.
```

> * Faster incremental triangulator through reused BFS allocations and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Accelerated the incremental triangulator through reused BFS allocations and
```
